README.md, before:

# godot-dodo

![Godot-Dodo logo imagined by Midjourney v5](godot_dodo_logo.png)

The godot-dodo project presents a pipeline to finetune open source language models on human-created, language-specific code retrieved from GitHub.

In this case, the targeted language is GDScript, but the same methodology can be applied to other languages.

This repository includes the following:

-   Scripts to assemble the finetuning dataset
-   Pre-assembled, raw datasets (up to a size of 60k rows)
-   Scripts to finetune a model
-   Links to model weights
-   Performance report comparing finetuned models

## Performance

![Results](models/results.png)

**For comprehensive results explaining the methodology used and a full list of all result, please refer to the full performance report [here](models/).**

In summary, `godot_dodo` models achieve significantly greater consistency than `gpt-4`/`gpt-3.5-turbo` when it comes to generating accurate GDScript syntax, but are somewhat less capable of following complex instructions.

## Concept

### How?

Unlike other, similar approaches to finetuning models such as stanford-alpaca, this approach does not use existing, larger language models for the output-values of the finetuning-dataset. All code used is human-created. Language models are instead only used to **label** each code snippet.

As such, we can assemble `comment:code` data-pairs in the style of [CodeSearchNet](https://github.com/github/CodeSearchNet), making use of powerful existing models to annotate high-quality human-created code.

### Why?

Some existing language models such as `gpt-4` are excellent coders. However, a lot of their ability is concentrated in only the most popular languages, such as Python or Javascript.

Less widely used languages are underrepresented in the training data and experience a massive performance drop-off, where models routinely mistake syntax or hallucinate language features that do not exist.

This aims to provide much more robust language-specific models that can be used to reliably generate code that compiles on first try.

## Dataset Generation

Due to this approach relying on human-created data, we scrape GitHub repositories using the GitHub search API.

Using the `language:gdscript` search term, we retrieve a list of repositories including GDScript code.

We also use `license:mit` to limit the dataset to suitable repositories. **Only MIT-licensed code is used for training!**

We then clone each one and apply the following logic:

-   Find `project.godot` file
-   Detect whether project is made for `3.x` or `4.x` Godot engine versions
-   Iterate through all `.gd` files found in the repository
-   For each one, split file into individual functions
-   For each function found, ask existing LLM (`gpt-3.5-turbo`) for a detailed comment describing the functions purpose
-   Add `instruction:response` data pair to dataset

Note that existing, human-written comments located above the code-block are not used for the `instruction` value. We are interested in consistent detail for comments, rather than trying to preserve some potentially higher-quality human-written ones.

Human comments within the code block however are preserved.

### Run

To assemble a dataset yourself, follow these instructions:

-   Run `python data/generate_unlabeled_dataset.py`
-   Run `python data/label_dataset.py`

Please do note that you'll need GitHub and OpenAI API keys in order to use these scripts.

## Pre-assembled datasets

Pre-assembled datasets included in this repository:

-   [godot_dodo_4x_60k](data/godot_dodo_4x_60k/)
    -   Assembled using `4.x` Godot projects - ~60k rows

Further datasets may be added in the future (particularly regarding `3.x` data)

## Finetuning

The fine-tuning process closely mirrors the one introduced by [stanford_alpaca](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca).

To reproduce a fine-tuned version of LLaMA, please follow the steps below.

### Hardware Requirements

In order to effectively finetune a `llama-7b` or `llama-13b` model, it is highly recommended to use at least two `A100 80GB` GPUs. You may otherwise encounter out of memory errors or experience extremely long training times, and will need to adjust the training parameters.

For finetuning `godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b`, eight `A100 80GB` GPUs were used.

Another important consideration is the protocol used for GPU communication. It is recommended to use `NVLink` setups rather than `PCIe`.

Should you only have access to `PCIe` setups, please replace `full-shard` with `shard_grad_op` in the `torchrun` command. This may severely speed up your training runs at the cost of potentially higher memory usage.

### Setup

Before finetuning, make sure to install all requirements using:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Run

For exact commands used for finetuning models, please refer to the individual model pages:

-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b)
-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b)

## Inference

To test out your finetuned model, you can use the `eval.py` script. Simply run:

```bash
python finetune/eval.py --model_name_or_path PATH_TO_FINETUNED_MODEL/
```

## Publishing to Huggingface

To easily upload a finetuned model to Huggingface, you can use:

```bash
python finetune/push_to_hub.py --model_name_or_path PATH_TO_FINETUNED_MODEL/ --push_name HF_MODEL_NAME --auth_token HF_ACCESS_TOKEN
```

## Finetuned model weights

Links to model weights hosted on Huggingface are provided in the respective model pages:

-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b)
-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b)

## Cost

Below the dollar-cost of assembling each available dataset and finetuning each model.

### Datasets

-   [godot_dodo_4x_60k](data/godot_dodo_4x_60k/)
    -   `30$` (`gpt-3.5-turbo` API costs)

### Finetuned Models

-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b)
    -   `24$` (8x A100 80GB instance costs)
-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b)
    -   `84$`(8x A100 80GB instance costs)

## Use with godot-copilot

Usage of finetuned models with [godot-copilot](https://github.com/minosvasilias/godot-copilot) for in-editor, fully local code generation may be supported in the future.

## Acknowledegments

Thank you to all MIT-licensed Godot projects! This would not be possible without you.

All projects that were scraped during assembly of the included finetuning data are listed in the respective dataset folders in [data](data).

Another thank you goes to [fluidstack.io](https://fluidstack.io) for their reliable, cheap GPU instances that were used for finetuning these models.

## Citation

If you wish to cite this project, please use:

```
@misc{godot-dodo,
  author = {Markus Sobkowski},
  title = {Godot-Dodo: Finetuned language models for GDScript generation},
  year = {2023},
  publisher = {GitHub},
  journal = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/minosvasilias/godot-dodo}},
}
```

You should also cite the [original LLaMA paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971) as well as [stanford-alpaca](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca).

Commit message:

Add Demo section to Readme

README.md, after:

# godot-dodo

![Godot-Dodo logo imagined by Midjourney v5](godot_dodo_logo.png)

The godot-dodo project presents a pipeline to finetune open source language models on human-created, language-specific code retrieved from GitHub.

In this case, the targeted language is GDScript, but the same methodology can be applied to other languages.

This repository includes the following:

-   Scripts to assemble the finetuning dataset
-   Pre-assembled, raw datasets (up to a size of 60k rows)
-   Scripts to finetune a model
-   Links to model weights
-   Performance report comparing finetuned models

## Performance

![Results](models/results.png)

**For comprehensive results explaining the methodology used and a full list of all result, please refer to the full performance report [here](models/).**

In summary, `godot_dodo` models achieve significantly greater consistency than `gpt-4`/`gpt-3.5-turbo` when it comes to generating accurate GDScript syntax, but are somewhat less capable of following complex instructions.

## Concept

### How?

Unlike other, similar approaches to finetuning models such as stanford-alpaca, this approach does not use existing, larger language models for the output-values of the finetuning-dataset. All code used is human-created. Language models are instead only used to **label** each code snippet.

As such, we can assemble `comment:code` data-pairs in the style of [CodeSearchNet](https://github.com/github/CodeSearchNet), making use of powerful existing models to annotate high-quality human-created code.

### Why?

Some existing language models such as `gpt-4` are excellent coders. However, a lot of their ability is concentrated in only the most popular languages, such as Python or Javascript.

Less widely used languages are underrepresented in the training data and experience a massive performance drop-off, where models routinely mistake syntax or hallucinate language features that do not exist.

This aims to provide much more robust language-specific models that can be used to reliably generate code that compiles on first try.

## Demo

To try out the pre-trained models, you can use the [inference_demo.ipynb](demo/inference_demo.ipynb) notebook.

In order to use that notebook on Google Colab, follow [this link](https://colab.research.google.com/github/minosvasilias/godot-dodo/blob/main/inference_demo.ipynb).

## Dataset Generation

Due to this approach relying on human-created data, we scrape GitHub repositories using the GitHub search API.

Using the `language:gdscript` search term, we retrieve a list of repositories including GDScript code.

We also use `license:mit` to limit the dataset to suitable repositories. **Only MIT-licensed code is used for training!**

We then clone each one and apply the following logic:

-   Find `project.godot` file
-   Detect whether project is made for `3.x` or `4.x` Godot engine versions
-   Iterate through all `.gd` files found in the repository
-   For each one, split file into individual functions
-   For each function found, ask existing LLM (`gpt-3.5-turbo`) for a detailed comment describing the functions purpose
-   Add `instruction:response` data pair to dataset

Note that existing, human-written comments located above the code-block are not used for the `instruction` value. We are interested in consistent detail for comments, rather than trying to preserve some potentially higher-quality human-written ones.

Human comments within the code block however are preserved.

### Run

To assemble a dataset yourself, follow these instructions:

-   Run `python data/generate_unlabeled_dataset.py`
-   Run `python data/label_dataset.py`

Please do note that you'll need GitHub and OpenAI API keys in order to use these scripts.

## Pre-assembled datasets

Pre-assembled datasets included in this repository:

-   [godot_dodo_4x_60k](data/godot_dodo_4x_60k/)
    -   Assembled using `4.x` Godot projects - ~60k rows

Further datasets may be added in the future (particularly regarding `3.x` data)

## Finetuning

The fine-tuning process closely mirrors the one introduced by [stanford_alpaca](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca).

To reproduce a fine-tuned version of LLaMA, please follow the steps below.

### Hardware Requirements

In order to effectively finetune a `llama-7b` or `llama-13b` model, it is highly recommended to use at least two `A100 80GB` GPUs. You may otherwise encounter out of memory errors or experience extremely long training times, and will need to adjust the training parameters.

For finetuning `godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b`, eight `A100 80GB` GPUs were used.

Another important consideration is the protocol used for GPU communication. It is recommended to use `NVLink` setups rather than `PCIe`.

Should you only have access to `PCIe` setups, please replace `full-shard` with `shard_grad_op` in the `torchrun` command. This may severely speed up your training runs at the cost of potentially higher memory usage.

### Setup

Before finetuning, make sure to install all requirements using:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Run

For exact commands used for finetuning models, please refer to the individual model pages:

-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b)
-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b)

## Inference

To test out your finetuned model, you can use the `eval.py` script. Simply run:

```bash
python finetune/eval.py --model_name_or_path PATH_TO_FINETUNED_MODEL/
```

## Publishing to Huggingface

To easily upload a finetuned model to Huggingface, you can use:

```bash
python finetune/push_to_hub.py --model_name_or_path PATH_TO_FINETUNED_MODEL/ --push_name HF_MODEL_NAME --auth_token HF_ACCESS_TOKEN
```

## Finetuned model weights

Links to model weights hosted on Huggingface are provided in the respective model pages:

-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b)
-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b)

## Cost

Below the dollar-cost of assembling each available dataset and finetuning each model.

### Datasets

-   [godot_dodo_4x_60k](data/godot_dodo_4x_60k/)
    -   `30$` (`gpt-3.5-turbo` API costs)

### Finetuned Models

-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_7b)
    -   `24$` (8x A100 80GB instance costs)
-   [models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b](models/godot_dodo_4x_60k_llama_13b)
    -   `84$`(8x A100 80GB instance costs)

## Use with godot-copilot

Usage of finetuned models with [godot-copilot](https://github.com/minosvasilias/godot-copilot) for in-editor, fully local code generation may be supported in the future.

## Acknowledegments

Thank you to all MIT-licensed Godot projects! This would not be possible without you.

All projects that were scraped during assembly of the included finetuning data are listed in the respective dataset folders in [data](data).

Another thank you goes to [fluidstack.io](https://fluidstack.io) for their reliable, cheap GPU instances that were used for finetuning these models.

## Citation

If you wish to cite this project, please use:

```
@misc{godot-dodo,
  author = {Markus Sobkowski},
  title = {Godot-Dodo: Finetuned language models for GDScript generation},
  year = {2023},
  publisher = {GitHub},
  journal = {GitHub repository},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/minosvasilias/godot-dodo}},
}
```

You should also cite the [original LLaMA paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971) as well as [stanford-alpaca](https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca).
